KEYCHAOS V 1.0 for Keykit - by Alberto Zin, 2006

README NOTES

KEYCHAOS is (yet another!) tool for generating music from fractal algorithms.
The tool is based on a three voice generator activated by the outcomes of fractals 
that are displayed on the screen. Several 2D and 3D algorithms can be "played" 
(Henon, De Jong, Rossler, Hopalong, Lorenz, Duffing, Clifford...), each of them
having different musical character. 

There are three main controllers for this tool:

- "Spd" (Speed), which controls the velocity of the fractal drawing and 
  therefore of the music generation.
- "Dyn" (Dynamic Factor), which is a parameter to deal with the "dynamic" 
  of the sound algorithm, to be intended as "pitch dynamics"
- "Roo", the root note. Altering this will alter the overall pitch generation.

Among the sound possibilities (organized in the "Music" menu) there are: 
- choice of the algorithm (Music->Fractal)
- mute of the tool (Music->Audio), in order to quickly visualize the fractals without hanging up audio
- selection of the mapping scale (Music->Scale)
- Strength (Music->Strength), which add "intensity" to the musical outcome
- Unipolar/Bipolar Algorithm (Music->Algorithm): since some algorithm tend to have bipolar (or unipolar) 
  outcomes that may not be the optimum for musical results, the outcome is converted 
  from bipolar to unipolar by taking the absolute value of X, Y, and Z before converting them to pitches
- Note Length (Music->Notelength): can be selected among a set of lengths for each voice (1,2,3)
- selection of patch (Music->PatchManager)

Among the "graphic" capabilities (organized in the "Display" menu) there are: 
- selection of the drawing color (Display->Drw Color)
- drawing point size (Display->Pt size)
- background color (Display->Bkg Color)
- show 2D (resp. 3D) fractal or single X, Y, Z components (Display->Display)

(Nice results by setting Black as background color and Green as drawing color !) 

Some features of the gui are activated on the basis on the particular fractal algorithm chosen. 
In particular, if the fractals are 3D (Lorenz, Rossler) there is the possibility 
to select the camera view through the azimuth and elevation sliders.
For some other fractals (De Jong, Clifford) there is the possibility of
changing the algorithm parameters (a,b,c,d). This allows the user to generate always 
different graphical and musical features.

It is clear that the sonification of an algorithm is always something 
personal. The interesting aspect is that the same algorithm can be used in 
totally different contexts and to control different audio or musical parameters. 
In this case the implementation is based on three voices, that are driven from the outcomes 
of X, Y, and Z (when applicable) of the algorithm. Here the algorithm is unique, 
and, for example, the X outcome of the algorithm is used to select the pitch and velocity 
through simple numeric mappings. 
This approach is equivalent to dividing the (X,Y,Z) space in small cells, each of them
generating a (pitch,velocity) output. The pitch values are mapped to a particular (user selectable) scale. 
The probability of activation of a particular voice is based on a special "Strength" 
parameters which, based on random outcomes, drives the Voice 1, 2 and 3 activation. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTING STARTED - TIPS

- Open KeyChaos
- Select "Duffing" from "Music->Fractal" Menu
- Press On, the sound will start flowing using the preselected GM patches (Harp, Marimba,   Vibraphone)
- Move the "Spd" slider to see the effects of improving drawing speed, note flow will speed up
- Move the "Roo" slider; you'll hear the changing of the root (base) note on which 
  the musical algorithm is based; this has an "harmonic modulation" effect.
- Change now the "Dyn" slider: this has the effect of "compressing" (<1) 
  and "expanding" (>1) the "pitch dynamic".
- A useful parameter is "Strength" in Music->Strength. There the amount of playing of each   single voice can be modified. Strength zero means that each voice
  plays seldom, Strength 5 means that with good probability the three voices play each
  time they are triggered.
- In order to change the background color: go to Display->Bkg Color->Random, then Redraw.
- To change also the point size (thickness) and to apply a gradient to the drawing color: 
    go to Display->Pt Size->Large, then Display->Drw Color->Gradient 1
- To visualize the single Y component of the resulting algorithm: Display->Display->Y

In order to quikly visualize a full fractal, deactivate the audio (Music->Audio->OFF) 
and set the speed "Spd" slider to high values. For example, DeJong fractal offers 
4 parameters (a,b,c,d) to be changed, selectable from the GUI and the resulting 
fractal can easily visualized by changing them and redrawing.

If you start playing and the musical pitch is too low/high, act on root parameter.

Starting the DeJong algorithm will illustrate the use of unipolar/bipolar algorithm parameter. 
Using the default (a,b,c,d) settings, DeJong algorithm produces an X outcome which is ~ always < 0. 
Mapped to pitches this means an octave range of -1, -2 and so on w.r.t. the current root note. 
In this case taking the absolute value of X, |X| can be helpful in terms of musical outcome,
and this is achieved using Music->Algorithm->Unipolar.

NOTE: if the Speed parameter is high and "Strength" is 4 or 5 the polyfony 
can be very high. 

In case you want to keep track of the performance, the following actions are suggested:

1) At the keykit prompt type "Recsched = 1"
2) start playing keychaos
3) when you have finished, stop keychaos
4) at the keykit prompt type "Snarf = Recorded"
5) at the keykit prompt type "Recsched = 0"
5) open a "Group" Tool
6) File->Read->Snarf in Group and you'll have it ready for further modifications.


Comments, questions, feedback, bugs to Alberto.Zin@poste.it

Enjoy !

Thanks to Tim Thompson, for releasing Keykit and making it available to the community.


